hi everyone my name is Dr Mark Eaton
welcome to heal NPD pathological
narcissism is a form of mental illness
that causes unstable self-esteem it's
also often associated with arrogant or
dismissing attitudes toward other people
occasionally the grandiosity breaks down
into feelings of worthlessness
depression and an intense need for
reassurance from others these Dynamics
can be difficult to understand but by
viewing them through the lens of
attachment Theory we can obtain insight
into where they come from how they
develop and perhaps most importantly how
they can be
[Music]
treated according to attachment Theory
we're all born with an instinct to form
attachment bonds with one or more
significant caregivers this instinct is
embedded into something called the
attachment system which helps regulate
the child's proximity to their caregiver
during the first few years years of life
the caregiver functions as a secure base
a stable and attentive Foundation of
care and reassurance from which the
infant or young child can begin to
explore their world whenever things get
too upsetting the attachment system
kicks in causing the child to cry or
cling to their caregiver in order to
reestablish the feeling of Safety and
Security these interactions repeat
themselves many times a day during the
first four years of life the child feels
distress the attachment system is
activated the child cries the caregiver
responds and Safety and Security are
restored over time these patterns of
interactions are organized into
something called internal working models
these are unconscious expectations about
how Human Relationships work there's an
internal working model for the self and
there's a corresponding internal working
model of other people these internal
working models combine in predictable
ways to form attachment patterns in
early childhood attachment patterns are
observable measurable and relatively
consistent throughout development they
can be correlated with all sorts of
outcomes attachment Studies have
followed subjects through infancy
childhood adolescence and adulthood
looking at how attachment influences
things like peer relationships mental
and physical health and partnering
childhood attachment patterns eventually
turn into adult attachment patterns this
chart shows the four adult attachment
Styles and how they relate to underlying
internal working models of the self and
of other people on the x-axis is model
of self which is also sometimes called
attachment anxiety and on the y axis is
model of others which is also sometimes
called attachment avoidance these
dimensions of attachment anxiety and
attachment avoidance combined to form
four prototypical adult attachment
patterns the first secure attachment is
defined by a positive model of self and
a positive model of other people the
self is viewed as worthy of love and
others are trusted to give love and
support this results in low attachment
anxiety and low attachment
avoidance the next preoccupied
attachment is defined by a negative
model of self with a positive model of
other people the self is perceived to be
unlovable but others are perceived as
capable of providing love and this
results in high attachment anxiety and
low attachment avoidance there's a
tendency to be preoccupied hence the
name with obtaining and keeping the love
and support that the person needs but
that preoccupation is dominated by
anxiety that the love will be withdrawn
and the self will be abandoned this
style is correlated with higher levels
of dependency and
insecurity the next dismissing avoidant
attachment is defined by a positive
model of self and a negative model of
other people the self is perceived to be
worthy of love but others are seen as
incapable of providing the love that the
self needs this results in low
attachment anxiety with high attachment
avoidance the self turns away from
Intimate Relationships often developing
dismissing attitudes toward other people
and a kind of compensatory self-reliance
this style is associated with feelings
of self-sufficiency low levels of
emotional intimacy and independent
attitudes toward life the final category
is called fearful avoidant attachment
it's defined by a negative model of self
and a negative model of other people in
this pattern the self is perceived as
Unworthy of love and others are seen as
incapable of providing the love that the
self needs this results in high
attachment anxiety with high attachment
avoidance the person may Express a
confusing combination of attachment
seeking behaviors that are marked by
ambivalence and mixed messages they want
love but they feel they don't deserve it
and they also fear that others will
reject hurt or abandon them this style
is associated with higher levels of
mental
illness since attachment looks at a
person's underlying model of self and
other people it's useful for examining
many forms of mental illness including
pathological narcissism a number of
Studies have drawn conceptual and
empirical relationships between
attachment Styles and pathological
narcissism in my own research I found
that grandiose presentations of
pathological narcissism are associated
with high levels of attachment avoidance
while vulnerable present ations are
associated with high levels of
attachment avoidance combined with high
levels of attachment anxiety and here's
why grandio narcissistic presentations
involve a defensive positive model of
self and a negative model of others this
combination of positive model of self
and negative model of others is
consistent with dismissing avoidant
attachment meanwhile vulnerable
narcissistic presentations involve a
breakdown of that defensive positive
model of self which exposes the
individual to an underlying negative
model of self the combination of a
negative model of self and a negative
model of others is consistent with
fearful avoidant attachment these
relationships between pathological
narcissism and attachment are important
because attachment studies can draw
direct lines between early care
experiences and adult Psychopathology
and that's because attachment
researchers have studied parent child
interactions categorizing infants into
attachment categories during the first
few years of life and then following
those children through development and
into adulthood looking at pathological
narcissism through the lens of
attachment provides a glimpse into the
internal working models of grandiose and
vulnerable narcissists and it also gives
us Clues concerning how those internal
working models were formed for example
Studies have found that infants who are
high in attachment avoidance usually
have caregivers who show less
sensitivity these care caregivers tend
to handle their children roughly to
display threatening or angry behavior
toward their children and to actively
reject their children's attachment
behaviors they also tend to restrict
emotional expressiveness they tend to
appear rigid or detached when relating
to their children and they reward their
children's positive emotions while
ignoring or rejecting their children's
negative emotions some studies of early
attachment also show that caregivers of
avoidant children display open
aggression toward their children or
intrusively interrupt their children
when they're engrossed in play this
insensitive rejecting and intrusive
quality of interaction creates a
negative model of others and therefore
high levels of attachment avoidance
these children learn that their
attachment seeking behaviors are likely
to be rejected and instead of expressing
their attachment needs these children
learn to deactivate their attachment
system through something called
displacement they can be observed
focusing intently on neutral objects in
the room when they're separated from
their caregivers or becoming so
engrossed with a toy that they may
appear to not even notice when their
caregiver leaves the room they don't
look distressed however physiological
measures like galvanic skin response and
heart rate show that these children are
in fact upset when left alone by their
caregiver they've simply learned not to
express their attachment needs openly
they're being taught to ignore them and
over time this form of regul ation
becomes autonomic and unconscious
resulting in the avoidant attachment
patterns that we see in adults both
avoidant children and pathological
narcissists appear to have experienced
an early emotionally invalidating
environment in fact when describing the
early experiences of narcissistic
patients Otto kernberg wrote quote
chronically cold parental figures with
covert but intense aggression is a very
frequent feature of the background of
these patients end quote both avoidant
children and pathological narcissists
seem to have experienced parental
pressure to hide negative emotions and
instead display emotions that are
pleasing to their caregivers they
learned to disconnect from their
authentic feelings to turn the volume
down on their attachment needs
eventually appearing not to have any
attachment needs whatsoever they were
forced to adapt and this adaptation
gradually became unconscious they
learned at an early age to place their
focus on things instead of people to
pretend not to be upset not to have
needs and not to want emotional intimacy
or closeness in psychodynamic
terminology this adaptation is called a
compensatory false self the false self
produces a defensively positive
self-image that revolves around
self-sufficiency the individual May
believe that they don't need anyone that
they're perfectly fine on their own and
for some this defensive self-sufficiency
is is also accompanied by pessimism or
even aggression toward other people who
have only ever been experienced as a
source of frustration and
disappointment indeed there are striking
similarities between dismissing avoidant
individuals and classic descriptions of
grandiose narcissism dismissing avoidant
adults lack empathy they're insensitive
to social cues they're self assured
dominant controlling competitive and
arrogant all those descriptions are from
the empirical literature on dismissing
avoidant attachment
but they sound like they were lifted
directly from the DSM descriptions of
NPD although dismissing avoidant adults
appear to have higher levels of social
competence they utilize defensive
strategies to cut off or minimize
distress related AFF effect that is
associated with experiences of rejection
and this defensive strategy is identical
to the one that individuals with NPD are
thought to use dismissing avoidant
attachment is conceptualized by one
researcher as quote a way of maintaining
aining positive self-image in the face
of rejection by attachment figures end
quote that researcher goes on to
describe the use of emotional distancing
and defensive development of a model of
self that is quote fully adequate and
hence invulnerable to negative feelings
which might activate the attachment
system end quote and this strategy Bears
much in common with earlier described
psychodynamic models of the grandiose
false self just as in dismissing
avoidant attachment individuals with
grandiose narcissistic presentation use
an unconscious strategy of ignoring the
authentic needs of the self there's an
adaptation to disavow subjective
distress but just as with avoidant
children the distress rages under the
surface in effect grandiose narcissism
involves two models of self superimposed
on each other one is defensively
positive while underneath lies a
negative model of self that is hungry
neglected needful chaotic and filled
with dis out experiences of rejection
and intolerance of its own attachment
needs when the grandiose model of self
breaks down it exposes the individual to
the underlying negative model of self
and we call this vulnerable
narcissism vulnerable narcissistic
presentations are most strongly
correlated with fearful avoidant
attachment patterns like dismissing
avoidant attachment this pattern
involves a negative model of others and
is therefore high in attachment
avoidance but unlike missing avoidant
fearful avoidant attachment also
involves a negative model of self this
attachment pattern has been described as
stemming from a particular style of
parenting that leads the child to
believe that others are uncaring and
untrustworthy and that the child
themselves is unlovable according to one
researcher adults who are fearfully
avoidant quote desire social contact and
intimacy but experience pervasive
interpersonal distrust and fear of
rejection this results in sub objective
distress hypers sensitivity to rejection
and active avoidance of social
situations where rejection could occur
like vulnerable narcissists fearful
avoidant adults display High dependency
on others from whom validation is needed
to maintain self-esteem the tenuous
balance between subjective awareness of
loneliness and isolation and mistrust
and resentment of potential attachment
figures leaves both fearful avoidant
adults and vulnerable narcissists
susceptible to feelings of depression
shame Fame and low
self-esteem now I want to be clear that
I'm not making the claim that dismissing
avoidant and fearful avoidant attachment
styles are really pathological
narcissism rather I'm making the
observation that these patterns produce
symptoms and interpersonal dynamics that
are very similar to pathological
narcissism we all have attachment
patterns and since there's only four
prototypical adult patterns many people
likely fit into dismissing and fearful
avoidant categories but that doesn't
mean there all narcissists attachment is
superimposed on other aspects of human
psychology this presentation is simply
looking at one form of mental illness
pathological narcissism through the lens
of attachment and when we do that a
picture begins to emerge of a child who
was discouraged from showing how they
really feel what they really need they
were pressured to pretend to be okay by
caregivers who punished or ignored the
child's authentic emotional needs and
who reward a pretend version of the
child that showed them what they wanted
to see this Dynamic resulted in a model
of others that's negative others are
experienced as untrustworthy or even
dangerous emotional intimacy is actively
avoided but it also results in a pretend
positive model of self this pretend self
is without significant attachment needs
it doesn't feel distress or need comfort
it's defensively grandiose
self-sufficient and in perfect alignment
with its own Ideal Image in order to
Short Circuit any experience of distress
that might activate the attachment
system that it's not allowed to have but
this positive model of self is built on
a shaky Foundation it's always in danger
of collapse when the floor finally does
give out the positive model of self
falls apart exposing the grandiose
narcissist to the underlying negative
model of self the place inside where all
those unmet and disallowed attachment
needs were hidden so many years before
and this is called narcissistic collapse
the individual now has a negative model
of self and a negative model of others
they experience high levels of
attachment anxiety combined with high
levels of attachment avoidance they
don't know where to turn and they're in
crisis as I've stated in previous
episodes some individuals with NPD
seldom if ever experience such collapse
others seem to live in a chronic state
of collapse and these two quote types of
narcissist are separated into categories
of grandiose and vulnerable narcissism
but the reality is that most people with
NPD uh display a complex mix of
grandiosity and vulnerability there may
be areas of functioning that are well
defended and others that are dominated
by vulnerabilities in the defensively
positive model of self flaws in the
armor so to speak so why do some people
with NPD seem to have stronger grandiose
defenses and a more robust positive
model of self well that's a good
question and one that hasn't really been
answered my own research has looked at
the contribution of peer rejection in
later childhood and Adolescence as one
possible contributing factor bullying
and other forms of social rejection May
weaken the defensively positive model of
self to the point of chronic collapse
other contributing factors may involve
Aces or adverse childhood experiences
like physical abuse sexual abuse verbal
abuse or significant household
dysfunction that would ER erode the
defensively positive self model via
trauma and persistent emotional
overwhelm despite the widespread online
pessimism concerning treatment for NPD
viewing these issues through the lens of
attachment provides hope for Meaningful
change it is possible to change your
attachment style as an adult to achieve
something called earned secure
attachment moreover once it is
understood that the dismissing devaluing
and unempathetic attitudes often
associated with pathological narcissism
are really about attachment avoidance it
becomes possible to connect with the
underlying vulnerability and emotional
pain that causes those attitudes in the
first place attachment avoidance is
about having been rejected ignored or
punished for having emotional needs when
you were very very young somewhere deep
inside there's a scared hurt and abused
child who's very alone narcissists tend
to be hard to reach because they're
frightened like the avoidant child in
attachment studies they've learned to
quote turn off their emotional distress
and to hide their need for comfort and
reassurance those needs are hidden by a
suit of armor called The False self that
pretends to have no needs whatsoever
it's as if the child were clothed in a
suit of protective armor whose heaviness
forced him to grow into grotesque shapes
and drained him of energy worse yet
after wearing the armor for some years
the growing body become so structurally
distorted that the armor can no longer
be taken off even though the dangers
against which it protected have passed
when this armor fails that unsupported
authentic self is exposed and a collapse
occurs this collapse is characterized by
attachment anxiety the defensively
self-sufficient narcissist is suddenly
profoundly dependent on other people for
help and reassurance but they're still
dominated by attachment avoidance and
this now fragmenting self structure has
nowhere to turn for help this is when
things like suicide and self harm become
particularly
dangerous the small child operating the
suit of armor is now exposed vulnerable
afraid and stuck between the need for
support and the absolute Terror that no
such support can ever be
found if you identify with any of what
I'm saying here try to use it as a road
map for beginning to address these
issues
the beauty and elegance of attachment
theory is that it simplifies complex
phenomena it distills everything down
into a couple of easily understood
Dimensions the need to feel good about
the self and the need to feel that
others can be trusted try to recognize
that the grandiosity you may feel isn't
who you really are it's a defensive suit
of armor that you develop to support
yourself when no one else would
vulnerability and collapse are simply
what happens when that armor breaks down
the scared hurt or angry person
underneath represents a part of you that
never received care or support you got
so good at hiding that part of you that
you may not even recognize it as being a
part of you most of the information
online about NPD is unhelpful at best
because it lacks a fundamental
understanding of the defensive
adaptations that characterize
pathological narcissism and therefore
it's missing the key ingredient that
everyone needs to understand and heal
from these issues
empathy narcissism can only be properly
understood through an empathetic frame
the hurt child at the center of
pathological narcissism is ignored by
caregivers then ignored by The
Narcissist themselves then misunderstood
and ignored by society and that's the
tragic nature of this disorder the false
self is so good at hiding the hurt child
that nobody ever sees them and they go
on hurting and trying not to hurt via
problematic relationship behaviors that
sometimes end up hurting others when you
experience a collapse into vulnerability
try to use that as a window into that
central pain that hurt child don't try
to get away ignore or punish that part
of yourself that's what caused the
problem in the first place instead try
to get closer try to call upon the
grownup parts of of you to see that
child compassionately and
empathetically recognize that these
vulnerable feelings of Shame
embarrassment longing fear depression
loneliness dependency and even rage
belong to a hurt child narcissism is
about hidden pain and the antidote is
empathy you can extend that empathy to
yourself find the hurt child inside the
suit of armor discover the basic
goodness of that child witness the
pressure that child feels to be perfect
self-sufficient and without emotional
needs instead of rejecting or punishing
that child for existing inside of you
try to treat that child with compassion
and
love and see what
happens okay so that's it for today if
you have questions or comments leave
them below and if you found this helpful
give it a thumbs up subscribe and tell
your friends until next time take good
[Music]
care